
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY
               
                  Diphenoxylate is rapidly and extensively metabolized in man by 
ester hydrolysis to diphenoxylic acid (difenoxine), which is biologically active 
and the major metabolite in the blood. After a 5 mg oral dose of carbon-14 
labeled diphenoxylate hydrochloride in ethanolic solution was given to three 
healthy volunteers, an average of 14% of the drug plus its metabolites was 
excreted in the urine and 49% in the feces over a 4-day period. Urinary 
excretion of the unmetabolized drug constituted less than 1% of the dose, and 
diphenoxylic acid plus its glucuronide conjugate constituted about 6% of the 
dose. In a 16 subject cross-over bioavailability study, a linear relationship in 
the dose range of 2.5 mg to 10 mg was found between the dose of diphenoxylate 
hydrochloride (given as Diphenoxylate Hydrochloride and Atropine Sulfate Oral 
Solution) and the peak plasma concentration, the area under the plasma 
concentration-time curve, and the amount of diphenoxylic acid excreted in the 
urine. In the same study the bioavailability of the tablet compared with an 
equal dose of the liquid was approximately 90%. The average peak plasma 
concentration of diphenoxylic acid following ingestion of four 2.5 mg tablets 
was 163 ng/mL at about 2 hours, and the elimination half-life of diphenoxylic 
acid was approximately 12 to 14 hours.
                  In dogs, diphenoxylate hydrochloride has a direct effect on circular smooth 
muscle of the bowel, that conceivably results in segmentation and prolongation 
of gastrointestinal transit time. The clinical antidiarrheal action of 
diphenoxylate hydrochloride may thus be a consequence of enhanced segmentation 
that allows increased contact of the intraluminal contents with the intestinal 
mucosa.
               
               
            
         