
               
               
               CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY:
               
                  
                     PureFe OB
                     
                         Plus 
                     supplies important prenatal vitamins
and minerals in a formulation that was especially designed to
supplement the nutritional needs of pregnant women, before, during and
after pregnancy. In PureFe OB Plus, patients receive the balanced
support of 13 essential vitamins and minerals, including 1 mg of folic
acid. The essential role of iron supplementation for pregnant women has
long been recognized. PureFe OB Plus is unique in that it utilizes two
(2) different forms of iron, i.e., Ferrous Fumarate and Polysaccharide
Iron Complex (as cell-contracted akaganeite), making available a total
of 106 mg of elemental iron per capsule as follows:
                  Ferrous Fumarate (anhydrous)             162 mg
Polysaccharide Iron Complex (PIC)    115.2 mg

                  
                  
                     Ferrous Fumarate: Provides
about 53 mg of elemental iron per dose. Ferrous Fumarate is an
anhydrous  salt of a combination of ferrous iron and fumaric acid,
containing 33% of iron per weight. The acute toxicity in experimental
animals is low and Ferrous Fumarate is well tolerated clinically. As a
ferrous salt, it is more efficiently absorbed in the duodenum. Ferrous
Fumarate contrasts very favorably with the availability of the 20% of
elemental iron of ferrous sulfate, and the 13% of elemental iron of
ferrous gluconate.

                  
                  
                     Polysaccharide Iron Complex: Provides
about 53 mg of elemental iron, as a cell-contracted akaganeite. It is a
product of ferric iron complexed to a low molecular weight
polysaccharide. This polysaccharide is produced by extensive hydrolysis
of starch and is a dark brown powder that dissolves in water to form a
very dark brown solution, which is virtually odorless and tasteless.
                  The
most frequent cause of anemia in pregnant women is iron deficiency.
Because of the continuous loss of iron due to monthly menstruation,
most women enter pregnancy with less than optimal iron stores.
Supplementation of iron must suffice to meet the need for maternal and
fetal erythropoisis, and account for daily maternal gastrointestinal
losses and obligate fetal transfer and growth. Iron requirements during
pregnancy usually cannot be met with the average diet (ACOG technical
bulletin (1993): Nutrition during Pregnancy. p.4 Number 179-April 1993:
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, Washington,
D.C. 20024-2188).
                  
                     PureFe OB Plus does not contain calcium, as
calcium may inhibit iron absorption because of the binding or
conversion of ferrous salts by calcium and other minerals. Calcium
salts can always be prescribed separately for women at high nutritional
risk, including those who do not eat adequate amounts of dairy
products. The recommendation of the National Academy of Sciences Tenth
Ed. 1989 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., suggests the
supplementation of 1200 mg of calcium for pregnant and lactating women
for the prevention of calcium deficiency.
                  Folic acid is a
hematopoetic vitamin and has been used extensively for the prevention
of neural tube defects (NTD). The need for folic acid in pregnancy,
with its increased demands of the fetus, or lactation, is not being met
by normal dietary sources. PureFe OB Plus capsules contain 1 mg of
folic acid. NTD are the most common birth defects that result in infant
mortality and serious disability. For women with a previous pregnancy
that resulted in a child with a neural tube malformation, the use of 4
mg/d of folic acid has been reported to be effective in preventing a
recurrence (MRC Vitamin Study Research Group, 1991). However, earlier
studies from the United Kingdom suggested that lower daily doses, for
example 0.36 mg might result in a comparable reduction of a recurrence
of NTD. Since neural tube closure is complete by four weeks following
conception, beginning folic acid supplementation after that time is not
likely to be of any value. It should be noted that a daily 4 mg dose of
folic acid did not prevent all NTD in the MRC study. Patients should be
cautioned that folic acid supplementation does not preclude the need
for consideration for prenatal testing for NTD (ACOG Committee Opinion,
Number 120, March 1993: The American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists, Washington D.C. 20024-2188). The U.S. Public Health
Service has recommended that all women of childbearing age in the
United States who are capable of becoming pregnant should consume 0.4
mg of folic acid per day for reducing their risk of having a pregnancy
affected with spina bifida or other NTD (Center of Disease Control,
1992). Recommendation for the use of folic acid to reduce the number of
cases of spina bifida and other neural tube defects: MMWR 1992:
41(RR14): 1-7).
                  

                  PureFe OB Plus has been formulated without the
addition of vitamins A, D, E and K. These fat-soluble vitamins can
accumulate and lead to birth defects. Supplementation of vitamins A, D,
E and K should be based on an individual need assessment.
               
            
         